[Music]
welcome to this session on network and
ssh
in this session we will look at how to
access remote machines
using a command line utility
so here is how
most of our daily life would be
that is
we are at home in a private network
our computer is connected to
the telephone
as a hotspot and then the telephone is
then connected to the internet service
provider let us say geo or air or
whatever
and then it is able to access the
internet so public network is basically
the internet and a lot of routing of
packets happen within the internet
and from our home we would like to
access let us say a particular website
so that website may be sitting in
another network of a different campus or
organization so for example
sitting at home in your hometown you
want to access the website of iit
address so the iit madras is this blue
private network let us say and one of
those computers running the web server
of iit madras would then be making its
content available
through the
campus lan followed by a network switch
which then passes on the content onto
the public network which will come
through
all this
connections to the internet service
provider for your
home telephonic network
and then on to your computer device so
that you can look at the home page and
all of this happens
within a fraction of a millisecond so
that you are having a very live
experience of browsing
now what it is also important for us to
realize is that we don't have a direct
access to
the private networks in respect to
organizations
so
we need to understand how is that made
possible so the way it is made possible
is
because of the different type of ip
addresses that are given so there are
two types of ip addresses the version 4
and version 6. so here i am giving the
examples of the ipv4 version 4 which are
still being used
so there are three type of addresses
that you would have in a machine
one address that will be there for every
mission is the so-called local host
address
whereby the system can refer to itself
so if it wants to refer to itself
through any network connection there
must be some address so the local host
address is 127.0.0.0
and then
after
the four-digit or four-part ip address
there is a slash and then a number is
given it tells you how many ip addresses
are possible
with that particular combination
okay
and so you can see that
most of the computers will have an ip
address which is 127.0.0.1
okay and some may have more of those
type of
series
depending upon the configuration
now
any private network ip address would be
falling into one of the three categories
here listed as class a class b or class
c
so class a
is the kind of network meant for large
organizations let us say item address
campus lan or the drdo lan
or the infosys
internal lan so all of these have
several thousands of computers if not
tens of thousands
so the ip address range will be 10 dot
and after that the three parts
can be any number between 0 and 255 and
that would give you a total of 16
million ip addresses that are possible
so a large organization can assign these
ip addresses to the machines within its
organization
the class b
addresses are starting with 172.16
and then the last two parts can be
varied and you have about 1 million ip
addresses that are possible
now class c
would actually have 65000 ip addresses
that are possible so now these three
addresses 10 dot something 172.16 or
something
192.168 or something these three
addresses are called the private
addresses which means
there cannot be any publicly visible
website or a service provider with these
addresses because they will not be
honored by the routing machines that
take the packets from your mission to
another mission
and every other address would then fall
into the category of a public network
which i have shown you here as a globe
okay
now when you have the
three types of addresses
you can actually have a possibility that
within a private network you can have
multiple private networks up to three
levels of hierarchy because you have
three address ranges that are possible
and you can actually prevent access from
anyone within the campus lan to access
your private network
and let us say this private network 2 is
the computer center
and private network 3 is for example an
internal network within the computer
center so you can actually protect a
storage box connected to a high
performance computer from the campus
user by having two layers of
routing that is required to reach it
and you can have
rules
for these switches in such a way that
a storage box within the
private network is not visible to a
campus user
and definitely not to a user from
outside the public
internet
now this is how basically we are able to
protect our machines as far as the
network access is concerned of course
there are ways by which a person can
penetrate into the network campus
network take control of one of the
machines and thereby
cause harm so those safety
nets also have to be thought of
now the concept of port is also
something that we must be familiar so
when a computer is connecting to another
computer so we may see that as a
physical connection where the network
card is connected with a wire which goes
into a network switch and then some
routing happens and then those packets
are going through a wire to the network
card into the other machine so that is
the physical network
but
the connection itself needs to talk to
the ip address of the server
on a specific port it is like when you
go to the bank you have various counters
one counter is
to get your passbook printed
updated etc
and let us say another counter is for
your service queries
and a third counter is to open accounts
new accounts
and a fourth counter may be to pick up
cash from your savings bank
now it's the same bank on the other side
of the desk but each window is meant for
a particular action similarly
network connections are also like that
each port number is meant for a
particular service
so what are those services
and these port numbers are already
standardized so what are those mappings
is something that we need to look at
so before that i want to also tell you
that if you want to get access to a
remote computer so you can actually get
it in many ways so virtual private
network
is one way so all iit mata students have
ability to
connect from their home
as if they are coming from the campus by
a vpn account if they have a good reason
to have that particular facility
another way of connecting to a remote
computer is by using what is called ssh
tunneling that is you can open in a
secure shell connection by
going through multiple hops
and also perhaps changing the port
number along the way
so that for security reasons you can
actually connect
from your machine all the way to a
machine in the campus
through machines that allow for this
kind of patterning to happen
and you can also have a remote desktop
access that is gui access also is
possible using tools like x2 go
or remote desktop protocol which is very
popular among the windows machine
or pcoip which is also possible a
possible option if you are using let us
say vmware
tools
and you can also have ability to access
a remote desktop as a part of the
browser window
and there there's a free software called
apache guacamole which is useful for you
to configure that if somebody sets it up
for you
it means that life is very simple
because you just need to open the
browser window and then the browser
itself shows you the desktop environment
that you can work with sometimes it is
needed because you may want to plot
and look at the plots on a computer
which is remotely located
and there are also commercial
tools which would help you see the
remote desktop via internet may be not
very safe but they are available and
very easy free versions are also
available so like team viewer any desk
and zohar assist etc
so these actually help you
access a remote computer which is deeply
located within a private network
and
by learning one of these techniques you
can actually start using facilities that
are available in a remote location
and
work for a good productivity right from
home
now some of the ports that i mentioned
earlier and their mapping with respect
to services are listed here
so these port numbers are standard port
numbers so most of the computers will
have those services on those respective
ports a exception would be like ssh
which may open not only on port 22 but
maybe also on port some other number
meant for a public network so that
there is a security
by which you slow down essentially
somebody who's trying to
check which port number you are
listening to etc
uh 21 is the port number for ftp file
transfer 25 is a port number for
unencrypted mail transfer so when you
are sending an email so what you are
doing is you are opening a network
connection with a remote computer over
port 25
and then sending the data and that's how
the mail is actually sent between
machines
port 80 is the http unsecured web server
access basically website access without
any security settings
and
443 is when you have the security
certificate present so most of the time
https connections are what we use today
so the port number over which this
service is
provided is 443
now every linux mission
allows for printing from any service via
the network connection over the port
number 631 so
if you open localhost colon 631 in a
linux computer you can see what are the
printers that are connected what are the
jobs that are being executed right now
for the printing purpose and so on so
you can do lot of configurations for
printing by simply accessing a website
which is localhost colon 631
and if you have configured a database
like mysql for remote connectivity the
port number is typical is 3306.
so like this many software will have a
standard
port number over which the service is
made available
now there is a concept of firewall that
we must be
aware of because
we must know that some
software is not opening up ports on my
machine without my knowledge and they
may actually open up some security
issues for me
how do i prevent such things to happen
is by setting up a firewall to prevent
connections
except on those ports on which i am
actually explicitly giving permission so
that is something that we can configure
quite easily on a linux mission we also
need to
check the firewall settings when we are
trying to access a service on a remote
mission because
our service may not be able to go
through
if there is a firewall on the way which
doesn't allow
connections over that particular port
number
and usually the network switches
can be configured to either allow or
deny
communications over a specific port
number so if things don't work we have
to also know
up to what point we are able to
communicate over the port number and
beyond what point is a problem therefore
we can help the computer center to debug
the problem for us
and at every hop
between the computers
there is a way by which firewall
controls can be set up in place
so one has to be
aware of these possibilities so that one
can learn more about them to secure
their own mission
as well as
to maintain a server if they are
responsible for a server for a service
that they are providing over internet
now how do we protect a server when we
are providing a service over internet
so there are anonymous users coming from
all over the world and
if we are not careful they may inject
viruses within
the
service request that they are making to
the web browser
through their web browser to our service
and thereby take control of our machine
so
one way by which we can protect is by
setting up a network firewall
which would
ensure that the connections are coming
from legitimate sources and on
legitimate
port numbers and so on and also at a
particular speed that we would like to
control
and then we also have a possibility of
what is called web application filter
which is a another form of a network
firewall but specifically for a
particular service so for example
for https it would actually look at the
http request
and analyze various fields that are
being sent to the web server and see if
any of them contain malicious code such
as sql injection attack etc
so by having these two layers of
protection the server is slightly better
placed in offering the services without
too much of a problem from anonymous
users who may be
attempting to take control of the server
an extreme way of securing it is
actually to enable what is called
security enhanced linux mode earlier it
was only available for centos fedora red
hat linux or suse linux etc which are
the server grade
and ubuntu being a desktop operating
system and user friendly etc did not
have it in the past but
offlet we have it as part of the ubuntu
open system also
and
what it does is just like a sentry at
the
entrance of a gate
it would have it would provide an
additional layer of access control on
files to services
so if there is any web server that is
supposed to access files and provide
them over internet
so ac linux would provide
one more layer of security by limiting
what parts of the file system can be
read
by the web server and what files are
visible to it or not
so this is a layer beyond
the file system permissions that we are
familiar already
and
sc linux offers what is called
role-based access control so
different services different users can
have
different levels of access to different
directories
and thereby
we can actually protect the open system
from being taken over by malicious
intent from
a remote location through the services
that we are offering
and
sc linux also provides what is called
sandboxing for every process that means
every process
will have restriction
of reading information about the
processes or memory locations or files
that are belonging to other processes
and by default it would operate in the
least privileged access mode for all the
subjects which means that
by default the doors are closed so that
is a mode in which sc linux will work so
that is one of the reasons why people do
not enable it because slightly painful
once you enable it to do some routine
work but it is going to be little bit
more secure way of going about it now
how do you know whether s linux was
enabled in your mission or not so
instead of ls minus l you can add one
more option capital z and see if there
is something more that is actually
appearing on the screen
and if it is then that means that
perhaps this linux was enabled same
thing for the processes if you
add
the capital z option for ps command then
you can also see whether
such a mode has been enabled
there are four types of
items that are coming under the purview
of rbse role base access control system
so the users the roles the types
and the level of security can be con
controlled quite elaborately so in the
brackets i have given some example
of such
types of
entities
and there are many modes in which secure
linux can be configured so you can have
it disabled more by default but you can
enforce it or you can even keep it in a
permissive mode
where it would actually do all the
checks but
only log them but let you actually
proceed further so that is useful when
you want to configure it
before going live
and there are tools like se manage and
restore con
which help you in managing the
permissions of directories and services
once the ac linux has been enabled
so if you have any publicly visible
server it's a very good idea to enable
sc linux
there are some tools that are useful in
a network to understand how
the communications happen so that you
can debug any given problem situation
so things like ping
so if you want to know whether a machine
is up
you can actually try to ping it
using the ip address and if there is a
response it means that machine is up
if there is no response it doesn't mean
the machine is down the reason is that
one can configure a mission to not
respond to ping requests
for security purposes so
only the positive thing has to be
interpreted correctly that is if the
ping is responded to it means the
machine is up
that's all
and you can also look at what is a route
taken by the network packets to a remote
machine by using the trace route
and you can convert the names of the
machines to ip addresses by using ns
lookup or dig utility
and you can check what are all the
network activities that are happening on
your machine by using netstat
and if you want to know if the machine
that you are working on is having a
public access
so then you need actually a different
machine in the internet to look at your
machine so for that is a website called
mxtoolbox.com which helps you to do some
debugging
and
if you encounter a machine name and you
want to know
whether it's a genuine machine or not
you can actually find out who registered
the name
for that machine
and if the
name and address of that particular
person who has registered that machine
appear to be reasonable then maybe that
name of the machine is perhaps
a genuine but there are lot of fake dns
entries out there so one has to be
careful
now if you are in a campus and you want
to look at what are all the ports that
are open around your computer in the
network you can run the utility called
nmap but you should not do it without
permission of the network administrator
because it can cause lot of network
traffic and there is even more dangerous
tool called wireshark where you can
sniff packets through the network to
do some diagnostics of the network
protocol it is again meant for usage by
the network administrator
a regular user is not supposed to do
nmap and wireshark without permission
now we will actually go and look at the
website
top 500.org to look at statistics and it
will be very interesting to note that
every single machine in the top 500 hpc
facilities in the world are actually
linux based which means that if you are
good at linux then you are able to
access a remotely located high
performance computing machines quite
comfortably okay and
one cannot run
the tasks on a hpc machine directly
you need to submit a job which will be
sent to a job scheduler and it will be
executed whenever its time comes in a
sequential manner as per the policies so
therefore one has to learn how to
run heavy tasks on a remote computer and
knowing linux very well will help a lot
and very often you cannot bring the
whole
data out to your laptop because the
internet
costs will be there for such transfers
and also you may have too much of data
that the bandwidth may not be sufficient
so it's very useful if you know linux
and a command line
environment then you can actually do ssh
to a hyperbomb's computer
and process the data remotely and bring
only the processed data out so that you
can save both the network charges as
well as bandwidth
so being comfortable with a command line
is almost a must
if you are into high performance
computing i hope that will be acting
like a motivation for you
that whatever you have learned till now
in the course will be quite useful in
case you are going to high performance
computing which enables machine learning
and
things like that
so let us go to the demo now
so if config is a utility that lets me
know what are the addresses that i have
and here we have
the
lan connection which is giving me an ip
address of
10 series which means
it's a class a
network which is in the campus
and loopback device
local loop device is also here which is
having an ip address of
127.0.0.1 which will be there for every
machine
okay to contrast
this
i will actually log into my
desktop computer and show you
so i am doing the remote connection
through ssh so you can see that
the host name is now funny server and
the machine on which i was recording is
icm so you can see that
from here within the terminal
environment we are able to ssh into a
different machine and we are able to use
that machine without shifting from the
place
that is because the secure shell is
allowing us to do this particular
command line way of using the remote
machines
and if you look at the if config for the
other machine that i am logged into you
see that it has way more number of
devices so it has
a a internet ip
of a
class b
and then it has also class a address
coming from the lam
and then it has a loopback
address of 127.0.0.1
and then it also has
a class c type of a address also
and
two of them
and then class b second one so why does
it have so many
ip addresses that is because in my
server i have got a
bunch of virtual machines and
containers that are running
and they will communicate with each
other using a separate network and i
also have
a private network setup in my own office
using a small d-link adapter that i
bought from
amazon so i have
this network also configured for
communication within the room which is
totally cut off from the campus land the
campus lan is communicating with the ip
address range of 10 dot something
so you can see that all these addresses
will be
different for different
machines so there will be a 10 series
address a 172 series address there is a
198 series address
and then there is one address which is
common for every machine that is
127.0.0.1 which is basically saying me
okay so everybody knows who is me then
themselves so that kind of an address is
available always
one way by which you can use network
tools on the command line
to convert names to ip addresses is to
check
nslookup
or some machine name so
iatm.ac dot in is one machine name that
i want to check the web server of our
institute
so you see that it is connected to a web
application filter
and it has an ip address of
10.24.0.191 which means that it is a
intranet ip
now because i am trying it from campus
it is an internet ip however if i try
the same thing from the website mx
toolbox the ip address will be different
so let us check that out
so i am opening a browser
okay and i go to mxtoolbox.com
okay here in this i will go to the dns
lookup
and type www.iitm.edu.10dns.lookup
so this is coming from the public
network so from the public network as
the rest of the world looks at our ip
address happens to be
103.158.42.57 so that's an ip address
coming from outside so now you see that
this is a public ip address okay and
from the ip address you can also see
that it is also basically transparently
telling that we have a web application
filter in place okay and this is a name
that is translated into another name
which means there are some aliases that
are possible okay
so let us see
for any other
address let us say
for mit.edu
and you would see that it is uh
having a dns record pointing to a
hkey.net
domain and akamai technologies is
maintaining that okay
and
what we can see here is
the same kind of information will come
out here also
okay and
you see that
hkey.net the domain name and akamai is
maintaining that and of course some
addresses are also being listed so what
this means is that mit.edu website is
actually maintained by a service
provider which is actually having
multiple machines all over the globe
very fast dissemination of information
across the globe and that kind of a
address is being resolved uniformly from
outside the
campus as well as from inside the campus
the reason is that this is not our
machine so it is not located on our lab
so therefore we do not get to see what
was the intranet ip for that particular
machine okay so it is a global ip that
we will know
okay so what we would do now is we can
also look at a tool called dig
which does the same task
so dick would actually go and get you
the
ip address of a particular machine and
the ip address happens to be here this
way now what we do is that big minus x
then it would do a reverse lookup now
you see that when it does a reverse
lookup the name for the particular iop
address is different
so what this means is that very often
the names that we are actually typing in
a browser window may not be the
canonical names
they could be basically aliases so now
let us look at the
ip address of this machine
and sure enough that will be matching
with what we originally had here
okay here you see 142 250 206 164
okay so it matches so which means that
for this particular ip address the
machine name actually happens to be this
one
but one of the aliases is basically
google.com now this address will not be
matching with what we see from the
browser so let us look at that
now you see the ip address here is
different the reason is that google.com
is served by many many machines across
the globe and therefore the machine ip
that you would get when you look up is
what is given by the nearest domain name
server so mx toolbox is located perhaps
somewhere in california and when we are
running this particular
command at
the campus then we are looking at our
campus dns server so therefore
these are very different geographical
locations so therefore the ip addresses
that we get for those host names will be
also different
so let us see if there is a particular
machine called aqua i know is a machine
from iit madras does it have a ip
address visible from the internet
so you see that it is not found so which
means that our hpc cluster called aqua
is not visible from the globe okay
but it will have an ip address visible
from the campus so you can look at it
now
so it would have a
local ipad so you can see that it say
intranet ipad so it will not have a
global ip so it's only available from
within the camps which means that if you
need to have access to our
petaflop supercomputer on campus then
you need to find ways of entering the
campus because the machine is not
available
as a visible to outside the campus so
which means that you must have a vpn
access
or you must use some other remote
desktop options to come into the campus
and then you can access the high
performance computer now let us
look at
how we can connect with the remote
machine like this
so
we have got
this machine so i can ssh into that
machine
and then i need to give my password
so once i give my password then i am
entering the machine so you can see that
within the terminal we are able to log
into a remote machine so in our case we
are logging into the
supercomputer of our campus
now if i put a w
it tells me who are all the people who
are logged on so you can see how many
students are logged on and from various
machines on the campus at what time they
are logged on what are they doing and
all that okay so this is a super cluster
hundreds of people can log in and submit
jobs and get them executed because we
have got
more than 200 nodes
of computer 200 computers connected in a
big network and jobs will be executing
on those nodes as we submit to a
a job scheduler
okay so
the job scheduler is called qstat
to just tell the statistics of the
queues that are available and it has an
alias so i do not want the ds so
i will remove the nls
and i run the command without the alias
so that it is meant for jobs of
everybody and now you can see that which
student has submitted which kind of a
job and on which node it is running what
job id it is running and what is the
status for example this is in queue but
this job is actually running okay and
it's a gpu queue
and this job is running and it is
occupying only eight cores
okay so like this you can actually see
that
a supercomputer is available to you
within
the secure shell by just a command and
environment you can look at the jobs you
can submit jobs
and you can actually make use of the
supercomputer facilities quite nicely
if you know the ssh
very well so
so from this desktop which is icme where
we are doing the recording of the videos
we have connected to till now ah three
different machines we have connected to
my desktop the aqua supercluster and we
have connected also to my laptop and you
see that i have not moved from here so
from the terminal we are able to connect
to multiple machines
now i will also connect with the intel
developer cloud via my desktop through
ssh
okay i have configured it already
so
so it actually already has the
ssh keys shared so it doesn't ask me for
a password
so you can also have an account on intel
developer cloud by registering on their
website
okay so here is a
opportunity for you to see that sitting
in iit madras by just using ssh i am now
logging on to a machine that is actually
located in
the
intel
high performance facility that they have
made available for education sector for
free
okay
and what kind of a machine it is it is a
ubuntu linux machine uh thank god
because it means that we are in a
familiar territory and therefore we can
go on to use
this particular machine
as if it's our own linux laptop okay so
most of the comments that we know will
work there
okay so you have got all kinds of stuff
out there
that you can work with so as you can see
we have
connected
using
ssh from the terminal environment
from this machine
to a desktop machine in the room
a laptop in the room
a supercomputer within the campus and
intel developer cloud which is actually
sitting somewhere in california perhaps
so this is possible because the
routing etc are taken care
and secure shell is
providing us a way by which we can
connect over a terminal and just because
a terminal is a very
limited amount of communication
needed for us to view what is there on
the screen
it tends to be quite fast in terms of
response
and therefore
learning the
bash shell
over
ssh connection
would be very useful because we will
then be able to work on remote computers
quite effectively and your knowledge of
ubuntu will come of use in almost every
such machine
let us look at the top 500.org to look
at
what are those supercomputers the world
and how fast are they
so let us look at the top 500.org
website
you have the
top
computers in the world being
listed every six months so you could
look at the
november 2021 listing which is the
latest as of now it shows that fugaku
is at
half an exa flop capacity at the number
one in the world which means that we are
in the ixa flop regime already
and microsoft azure system is at the
number 10 position which means the
public cloud which you can access by
paying for it is already available at
number 10 in the world
and let us see what are the kind of
statistics
with respect to
the operating system
so in terms of our persisting family you
can see that 100
of these supercomputers are linux family
that's exciting for us because we are
now familiar with the
linux operating system
and which flavor of operating system is
also listed here ubuntu 20.04 is also
listed here along with red hat
enterprise linux and sent os
hp crayos and all that so all these are
basically linux so they'll have the same
file system uh with the same structure
and also the bash shell so therefore we
are at home in any of these top 500
supercomputers in the world
and where are we with respect to the
countries when it comes to india
we could look at that
so here we see that india is at position
which is not bad
but i am sure that it will climb up in
the next
couple of years because several national
supercomputing mission
facilities are being set up in the
country
and we are at home in any of these
missions because they are all going to
use linux so i hope it was useful for
you to
find
the application of learning
supercomputer
learning the operating system that
powers the supercomputers in the world
so here is a brief demo on
checking the ac linux
whether it was enabled or not so on the
machine where i am recording so i will
just put ls minus l z
and you would see that there's a
question mark
which means that perhaps sc linux was
not enabled on this nation
and also i would
use the ps minus ez option and again
there is a question mark here which
means that the processors also do not
have the
s linux
security pages enabled
so i would see if the
web server for our department is up
using the ping and it appears to be
available so i happen to have an account
on that so i will log in there
and in this web server what i would do
is
look at the files
and with the capital z option you see
that there's a lot of information that
is coming here so you see that all these
options show
that the file system has
had a layer on top of it from the sa
linux which is a protection mechanism so
on the web server of our department the
sd linux has been enabled
and also the process listing normal
listing would actually show that there
is a web service that is running httpd
but if i use
same listing with capital z
you would see that the web servers are
running with some additional conditions
where it
has the
fields that are available here in front
of it where the role namely the httpd
underscore t is listed so that
whatever the
restrictions meant for that particular
service will then be put in place
so you can see that there are certain
other services
which have different roles compared to
http and that is exactly what i was
talking about
where the role based access can be given
to specific services keeping in mind
what kind of users are expected to
connect with the machine through those
services
and
netstat is a
command to show you the network
statistics
and here you can look at what all the
various
programs that are running and
you could see that
the tcp connection right now to the web
server is open
from a particular foreign address and
the port number from the client side is
also listed
and there is also an ss connection
coming from
the ip address of the machine where we
are recording so you can actually see
what are the active network connections
that are actually
taking place in the computer using
netstat
so we will do the same netstat on the
computer where we are recording so you
would see that you have got
a bunch of ports that are open for
various purposes
and there is no service which is
basically for http so i am not running
any web server
on this machine but i am opening a
connection
outward which basically
is to connect with the
google account
as well as
the obs recording system that is running
is also actually
having
an internet connectivity
for
the
service
so you can see that
though i have not explicitly opened that
particular site it has been opened by
the obs
software that is running in the
background perhaps to check for any
update or whatever
okay
so
this is some brief demo
on ac the next netstat